The President:
It's now been a little over
a month since I signed health
insurance reform into law.
And while it will take some time
to fully implement this law,
reform is already delivering
real benefits to millions of Americans.
Already, we're seeing a health
care system that holds insurance
companies more accountable and
gives consumers more control.
Two weeks ago, four million
small business owners and
organizations found a postcard
in their mailbox informing them
that they could be eligible for
a health care tax cut this year
-- a tax cut potentially worth tens of thousands of dollars;
a tax cut that will help
millions provide coverage to
their employees.
Starting in June, businesses
will get even more relief for
providing coverage to retirees
who are not yet eligible for Medicare.
And a little over a month
from now, on June 15th,
senior citizens who fall into
the prescription drug coverage
gap known as the "donut hole"
will start receiving a $250
rebate to help them
afford their medication.
Aside from providing real,
tangible benefits to the
American people, the new health
care law has also begun to end
the worst practices of
insurance companies.
For too long, we've been held
hostage to an insurance industry
that jacks up premiums and
drops coverage as they please.
But those days are
finally coming to an end.
After our administration
demanded that Anthem Blue Cross
justify a 39% premium
increase on Californians,
the company admitted the error
and backed off its plan.
And this week, our Secretary
of Health and Human Services,
Kathleen Sebelius, wrote a
letter to all states urging them
to investigate other rate hikes
and stop insurance companies
from gaming the system.
To help states
achieve this goal,
we've set up a new Office
of Consumer Information and
Insurance Oversight, and will
provide grants to states with
the best oversight programs.
In the next month, we'll also be
putting in place a new patients'
bill of rights.
It'll provide simple and clear
information to consumers about
their choices and their rights.
It'll set up an appeals
process to enforce those rights.
And it will prohibit insurance
companies from limiting a
patients' access to their
preferred primary care provider,
ob-gyn, or emergency room care.
We're holding insurance
companies accountable in other
ways, as well.
As of September, the new health
care law prohibits insurance
companies from dropping people's
coverage when they get sick and
need it most.
But when we found out that
an insurance company was
systematically dropping the
coverage of women diagnosed with
breast cancer, my administration
called on them to put an end to
this practice immediately.
Two weeks ago, the entire
insurance industry announced
that it would comply with the
new law early and stop the
perverse practice of dropping
people's coverage when they get sick.
On Monday, we'll also be
announcing the new rule that
allows young adults without
insurance to stay on their
parents' plan until
they're 26 years old.
Even though insurance companies
have until September to comply
with this rule, we've asked them
to do so immediately to avoid
coverage gaps for new college
graduates and other young adults.
This also makes good business
sense for insurance companies,
and we're pleased
that most have agreed.
Now we need employers
to do the same,
and we're willing to work with
them to make this transition possible.
These changes mean that
starting this spring,
when young adults
graduate from college,
many who do not have health care
coverage will be able to stay on
their parents' insurance
for a few more years.
And you can check
healthreform.gov to find a list
of all the insurance carriers
who have agreed to participate
right away.
I've said before that
implementing health insurance
reform won't happen overnight,
and it will require some tweaks
and changes along the way.
Ultimately, we'll have a system
that provides more control for
consumers, more accountability
for insurance companies,
and more affordable choices
for uninsured Americans.
But already, we're seeing how
reform is improving the lives of
millions of Americans.
Already, we are watching small
businesses learn that they will
soon pay less for health care.
We are seeing retirees realize
they'll be able to keep their
coverage; seniors realize they'll be able to afford their prescriptions.
We're seeing consumers get a
break from unfair rate hikes and
patients get the care they
need when they need it,
and young adults getting the
security of knowing that they
can start off life with one
less cost to worry about.
At long last, this is what
health care reform is achieving.
This is what change looks like.
And this is the promise we will
keep as we continue to make this
law a reality in the
months and years to come.
Thanks so much.